## Table of Contents

- [If Statements in Python](#if-statements-in-python)
    * [Overview](#overview)
    * [The Syntax](#the-syntax)
    * [Examples](#examples)
    * [The `elif` Statement](#the-elif-statement)
        - [Overview](#overview-1)
        - [Examples](#examples-1)
    * [Nested `if`-statements](#nested-if-statements)
    * [Truthy, Falsy and `if` - Three Friends](#truthy-falsy-and-if---three-friends)
    * [Where's the Ternary Operator?](#wheres-the-ternary-operator)
        - [Overview](#overview-2)
        - [Examples](#examples-2)
- [Conclusion](#conclusion)
    

## If Statements in Python

### Overview

`if`-statements are a fundamental component of any programming languages. Their main utility lies in the fact that they allow you to take different actions based on the nature of some condition. If the condition is true, they allow you to do a specific thing and if the condition is false, they allow you to do another thing.


This is a very powerful mechanism. Say you have a number (maybe taken from a user or read from a file) and you want to tell a user of your program whether that number is positive or negative, even or odd, greater than some other number or not, present in a list or not, etc. In all such situations, you can use an if statement to make a decision.

For those of you who have some experience in C, this particular syntax for an `if` will be familiar:

```c
int main(void)
{
    int x;
    printf("Enter a number: ");
    scanf("%d", &x);

    if (x >= 0)
        printf("The number is positive.\n");
    else
        printf("The number is negative.\n");

    return 0;
}
```

This particular block is simple. If the value of `x` is greater than or equal to `0`, whatever is inside the `if`-block will be executed. Otherwise, whatever is inside the `else`-block will be executed.

`if`-statements in Python have a slightly different syntax, but you will still be able to draw similarities between them. To do that, let's generalize the syntax to some kind of pseudocode:

```code
if condition
{
    // body
}
else
{
    // body
}
```

Basically, you need to write the keyword `if`, followed by the condition that the `if` will operate on. Then the body of the `if` statement will follow, within some kind of demarcation which indicates that this part is the body of the `if`. In C, this demarcation is done through the two braces, `{` and `}`. Whatever is in between `{` and `}` after an `if`-statement is part of the body of the `if`.


### The Syntax

Now, let's look at the Python `if`-statement:

```python
if condition:
    # body
else:
    # body
```

From the above generalization, at first glance, we see that it has at least two of the components: the `if` keyword and the condition.

But, what about the demarcation? This is where Python differs from most other programming languages. Instead of using braces (`{` and `}`) for specifying which code block belongs to which part of the code like in C or Java, Python uses _indentation_. Indentation refers to the space that occurs before a line of code. For example, in the above `if` statement, the comment `# body` is preceded by 4 spaces, meaning it has an indentation level of one. 

Why one? Because a number of spaces are considered to be the first level of indentation. In Python, it is generally 4 spaces. If you were to add 8 spaces, that would mean there are two levels of indentation as `8 /4 = 2`. For 12 spaces, the indentation level would be three and so on.

In languages like C, the indentation is unimportant, so much so that you can remove it completely:

```c
int main(void)
{
int x;
printf("Enter a number: ");
scanf("%d", &x);

if (x >= 0)
    printf("The number is positive.\n");
else
    printf("The number is negative.\n");

return 0;
}
```

This is because the braces tell C which code block belongs to which part of code. Since everything between `int x` and `return 0` is enclosed in `{` and `}` after `main()`, it is a part of `main()`. The indentation is immaterial.

But, in Python, indentation is critical. If a particular line of code is indented by at least one level after a previous line of code, that means the former is a part of the latter. What do I mean by this?

```python
if condition:
    print("Hi! I am Python.")
else:
    print("I love indentation!")
```

Here, the first `print()` call has 4 spaces before it, therefore being indented by one level, and the entire line is preceded by the `if` statement and the `:` (colon). Therefore, this first `print()` call is a part of the `if`block.

Similarly, the second `print()` call is indented by one level after the `else` statement and the `:`. As a result, it is part of the `else` block.

The next natural question is why the `:`? Well, you need to tell Python where to start looking for the body of the `if`. Think about it. It does not have braces and relies solely on indentation. Therefore, there _needs_ to be something which tells Python that, `Hey! I am done writing the if statement. Now whatever follows this :, all that stuff is supposed to be the body of the if, as long as it is indented by one level after the if`.

The colon is basically used for this.

> Don't worry if all this is not making much sense now. It will become clearer once you see more block statements such as loops and functions.

Therefore, Python does follow the generalized syntax of an `if`-statement:

* It has the keyword `if`
* It has the condition after the `if`
* For demarcation of the body, it uses the `:` and indentation

One other difference between Python `if`-statements and those in other languages is the need to enclose the condition within `(` and `)`. Let's see a comparison:

```c
if (x >= 0)
    printf("x is positive.\n");
else
    printf("x is negative.\n");
```

Notice how the condition has been placed in brackets. The equivalent Python code:

```python
if x >= 0:
    print("x is positive.\n")
else:
    print("x is negative.\n")
```

Notice how the condition is not placed in brackets. Basically, you can conclude that Guido van Rossum despises brackets.


### Examples

Now that we have the syntax out of the way, let's look at a few examples:


* **Checking whether a number is positive or not**: 

```python
x = int(input("Enter a number: "))
if x >= 0:
    print("x is positive")
else:
    print(" x is negative")
```

* **Checking whether a number is even or not**:

```python
x = int(input("Enter a number: "))
if x % 2 == 0:
    print("The number is even.")
else:
    print("The number i odd.")
```

* **Making sure a number is not zero before division**.

```python
x = int(input("Enter a number: "))
y = 100
if x != 0:
    y = y / x
    print("y was divided by x. The result is ", y)
else:
    print("You are trying to divide by zero which is not allowed.")
```

Notice how the second line inside the `if` is indented at the same level as the first line. This tells Python that this line is a part of the `if`-statement. Also notice that for writing the `else`, we are going back to the _zero_ level of indentation. This indicates the end of the `if`-block and the beginning of the `else`-block.

* **Checking whether an item is inside a list or not:**

```python
l = [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8]
x = int(input("Enter number: "))

if x in l:
    print("Item is in the list.")
else:
    print("Item not in list.")
```

* **Printing the index of a character if it is in a string:**

```python
string = "This is a string"
key = input("Enter a character: ")
index = string.find(key)

if index != -1:
    print("Character is at", index)
else:
    print("Character not in string.")
```

* **Incrementing a number based on some condition:**

```python
x = 200
if x >= 100:
    x += 100
print(x)
```

Again, notice how `print()` is at the same level of indentation as the `if`. This means it is not part of the `if`. Also, take note of how it is not mandatory to include an `else`-block. It basically means we don't want Python to do anything in case the condition is false.

### The `elif` Statement

#### Overview

Sometimes, we want to take different decisions based on different states of the same variable (or expression) or based on different conditions. In such cases, we use the `elif`-statement, which is a short-form of `else if`. The basic syntax is as follows:

```python
if condition1:
    # body
elif condition2:
    # body
elif condition3:
    # body
.
.
.
else:
    # body
```

You can have as many `elif`'s after the `if` and can still exclude the `else` at the end if it is not needed.

#### Examples:

* **Classic program to assign grades to students based on different tiers:**

Let's say this is the grade distribution for marks:

|  Marks range | Grade |
|:------------:|:-----:|
| 40 and below |  Fail |
|     41-50    |   F   |
|     51-60    |   E   |
|     61-70    |   D   |
|     71-80    |   C   |
|     81-90    |   B   |
|    91-100    |   A   |

This can be done using `if-elif-else`:

```python
marks = int(input("Enter marks: "))
grade = ''

if marks > 100:
    print("Invalid input.")
elif marks > 90:
    grade = 'A'
elif marks > 80:
    grade = 'B':
elif marks > 70:
    grade = 'C':
elif marks > 60:
    grade = 'D'
elif marks > 50:
    grade = 'E':
elif marks > 40:
    grade = 'F'
else:
    grade = 'Fail'

print(grade)
```

If `marks` is greater than `100`, the input is invalid. If that is false, that means `marks` is less than or equal to  `100`, in which case if it _also_ greater than `90`, the grade is `A`. If that is false, that means `marks` is less than or equal to `90`, in which case if it is also greater than `80`, the grade is `B` and so on.


If there was no range for `Fail` and `F` was the final grade, you could have easily omitted the `else` at the end.


### Nested `if`-statements

You can write an `if`-statement inside another `if`, `else` or `elif` block. This can be useful when you need to take another decision based on the some previous decision.

Say you are taking the age and gender of someone and checking whether that person is eligible to vote or not. The only thing is that if the person is male, you're going to show, `Sir, you're eligible to vote` and if the person is female, you're going to show, `Ma'am, you're eligible to vote.`. You can do this using nested `if`:

```python
age = int(input("Enter age: "))

if age >= 18:
    gender = input("Enter gender (M/F): ")
    if gender == 'M':
        print("Sir, you're eligible to vote.")
    else:
        print("Ma'am, you're eligible to vote.")
else:
    print("You're not eligible to vote.") 
```

As can be seen, we've successfully used nested `if` to do our job. Now, I want you to take a look at the indentation. For the first `if`, the indentation level is zero. For its body, the indentation level is one.

Things get interesting from the second `if`. The `print()` call needs to be a part of this `if`. Since the `if`'s indentation level is one, the `print()`'s indentation level is two (8 spaces), thereby telling Python that this `print()` is a part of the second `if`. The `else` is at the same level as the second `if`, thereby indicating that this `else` corresponds to the second `if`. The second `print()` call is indented one level after `else`, indicating it is a part of `else`.

Finally, the last `else` is at the same level as the first `if`, indicating that it is a part of the first `if`. The `print()` is indented by one level after this `else`, indicating it is a part of `else`.

The same could have been achieved using `if-elif-else`:

```python
age = int(input("Enter age: "))
gender = input("Enter gender (M/F): ")

if age >= 18 and gender == 'M':
    print("Sir, you're eligible to vote.")
elif if age >= 18 and gender == 'F':
    print("Ma'am, you're eligible to vote.")
else:
    print("You're not eligible to vote.")
```

This has a few more operations (such as evaluating `age >= 18` twice), but is cleaner. Whether you're going to use nested `if`'s or a bunch of `elif`'s will really depend on what you're doing.

### Truthy, Falsy and `if` - Three Friends

In the document about operators, I told you about [truthy and falsy](/4.0%20Variables%20and%20Operators/4.2%20Operators.md#meet-my-friends---truthy-and-falsy). You can use the truthy and falsy nature of data types in `if`-statements. Let's look at a few examples:

* **Removing an item from a list if it is not empty:**

```python
l = [1, 2, 3, 4]

if l:
    x = l.pop()
    print("Removed", x)
else:
    print("Cannot delete anything from empty list.")
```

Since a non-empty list is considered to be `True`, the `if` will only work if the list has at least one element in it. If it doesn't, the list will be considered to be `False` and the `else` block will be executed. With the current state of the program, the output will look like this:

```
Removed 4
```

* **Checking whether a sequence is empty or not**:

You know an empty sequence is actually equivalent to `False.` Therefore, writing something like `not l` will evaluate to `True` when written in an `if`-statement provided the sequence is empty. Therefore, you have a simple way of checking whether a sequence is empty or not:

```python
if not l:
    print("The list is empty")
else:
    length = len(l)
    print("The list has", length, "items")
```

This is the most common use of truthyness and falsyness: making sure a sequence is empty or not empty, depending on the context.


### Where's the Ternary Operator?
 
#### Overview

In C/C++, there's a single-line syntax available for simple `if-else` situations. This is called the ternary operator, since it has three operands:

```c
(x > 10) ? x - 10 : x + 10
```

I won't discuss in details. You can find more information [here](https://www.sitesbay.com/cprogramming/c-ternary-operator).

A natural question that people coming from other languages have is whether Python has a ternary operator or not. The simple answer is that it doesn't. But, Python does have a syntax available for writing simple `if-else` situations one a single line. The general syntax is as follows:

```python
expr1 if condition else expr2
```

Here, `expr1` and `expr2` are any two valid Python expressions. `condition` is the condition that your `if` is subjected to. If `condition` evaluates to `True`, `expr1` is executed and otherwise, `expr2` is executed.

Unlike the expanded, multi-line `if`, you cannot omit the `else` here. Think about it. You're most probably going to use it as the right side of an assignment, that is to say it's going to be on the right side of the `=` operator. What will Python assign to the variable on the left side if your condition is `False`? Hence, the `else` is mandatory.

#### Examples

* **Checking even or odd:**

```python
x = 10
even_odd = 'Even' if x % 2 == 0 else "Odd"
```

* **Checking negative or positive:**

```python
x = -1
is_positive = True if x >= 0 else False
```

* **Incrementing a number if it is zero:**

```python
x = 0
x = x + 1 if x == 0 else x
```

* **Dividing a number only if divisor is not zero:**

```python
x = int(input("Enter dividend: "))
y = int(input("Enter divisor: "))

quotient = x / y if y != 0 else None
```

> We'll talk about `None` later.

It's a useful thing to have since it saves you some lines of code while still being extremely readable (almost English, isn't it?)

## Conclusion

`if`-statements are a fundamental part of any programming language and mastering them is critical. Make sure you practice them extensively.

One last thing though. You will notice that the folder that this document is in is called 'Control Flow Statements'. This is because, using `if-elif-else`, you're essentially shifting the control of the program to different blocks of the program, thereby changing the flow of control. Hence, an `if`-statement is a type of control flow statement.

Well, that's all for `if`-statements in Python!

Malay Agarwal.
