## Table of Contents

## A Little More on Iteration

So far, you've seen how you can iterate over a set of steps using `for`- and `while`-loops. In this document, we are going to take a look at some best practices when it comes to iteration and Python.

To be more specific, we are going to take a look at a few built-in functions that are commonly used while iterating, and are going to compare `for`- and `while`-loops.

Let's begin by comparing `while`- and `for`-loops.

### `for`- or `while` - Which one?

To be clear, which of the two loops you should use depends completely on the context and your preference. It is always possible to convert any `for`-loop to a `while`-loop and vice-versa, irrespective of complexity.

But, there do exist certain situations where a `for`-loop trumps (ha!) a `while`-loop and vice-versa.

Let's look at a few examples.

#### Iterating over sequences:

You can use any of the two loops to iterate over a sequence such as a list, tuple or a set. Here, by iterating over a sequence, I am referring to accessing each element of the sequence in order.

You can use a `while`-loop as follows:

```python 
l = [1, 2, 3, 4, 5]
length = len(l)
i = 0

while i < length:
    print(l[i])
    i += 1
```

You can use a `for`-loop as follows:

```python
l = [1, 2, 3, 4, 5]
for item in l:
    print(item)
```

Both the snippets give the same output, but there are big differences between the two. In the `while`-loop example, we are keeping track of the index that we are accessing in the variable `i`. Since indexing begins at `0` and ends at `length - 1`, we have the predicate `i < length` in the loop. We are accessing the elements in the list using the index. Also, take note of the increment done to `i` at the end of each iteration. 

In the case of the `for`-loop, we are simply getting each element of the list in the variable `item` and printing it. 

There are clear advantages to this scheme. First, you do not need to worry about the index that you are accessing. Consequently, there's no need to increment something. In the `while`-loop, if you forget the increment at the end, the loop will become infinite. There's no such risk in case of the `for`-loop.

In the `while`-loop, if the predicate is wrong, it is possible that it will access indices that do not exist such as `length + 1`. In the `for`-loop, you do not need to worry about the predicate.

The biggest advantage, though, comes in the form of readability. In the second example, it is directly evident what the loop is doing. While you might need some time to understand what the `while`-loop is doing, you can read the `for`-loop as plain English (almost).

Thus, generally speaking, if you plan to iterate over the items of a sequence in order, use a `for`-loop. It is simpler, risk-free and much more readable.

In fact, even when you want to access items using the index, a `for`-loop proves to be better:

```python
l = [1, 2, 3, 4, 5]
length = len(l)

for index in range(length):
    print(l[index])
```

There's no possibility of having an infinite loop because you forgot the increment. `range()` takes care of that.

#### Writing infinite loops

To write a `for`-loop, we always need a sequence. Since Python does not have infinite sequences of any kind, it is not traditionally not possible to write an infinite `for`-loop. There are certain situation where you can write an infinite `for`-loop, but that's for a future document.

Thus, if you want to write infinite loops, you'll have to use a `while`-loop:

```python
while True:
    #do something
```

> Note: Trying to run this will produce an error. We will see how we can get rid of that in a future document.