## Data Types and Structures in Python

Just like every other programming language, Python has its own set of data types and structures to hold data in programs. These data types do two things:

* Define the amount of memory that should be used for the data (though this is not that concrete and consistent in Python).
* Define the operations that can be performed on the data.

For example, a piece of data (let's call it an entity moving forward), when said to be an integer, will consume the memory that integer entities should take and will support all the operations (addition, subtraction, multiplication, etc.) of an integer entity. On the other hand, an entity, when said to be a string, will consume the memory for string entities and will support all the operations (concatenation, spliting, slicing, etc.).

So, to summarize, a data type is nothing but a way for Python to make sense of an entity, both in terms of memory and in terms of operations.

Now, entity, in general, can refer to anything. But, being a programming language, Python only accepts a set of entities, as defined in the language's implementation. While an integer, string and a dog are all entities, Python is capable of making sense of only the former two and not the last one. A dog has no meaning for Python, unless you represent it in terms of Python's accepted entites.

So, what _are_ the (built-in) entities that Python accepts? There are 11 of them:
* `int` - Used to represent entities that are integers. Examples - `1`, `2`, `-2`, `-3`, etc.
* `float` - Used to represent floating-point entities. Examples - `1.1`, `-1.2`, `-300.0`, etc.
* `complex` - Used to represent complex numbers (yup). Examples - `1+2j`, `2+3j`, etc.
* `str` - Used to represent entities which are strings, meaning text. Examples - `'Python'`, `'IT Club'`, etc.
* `list` - Used to represent a collection of mixed entities (`str`, `int`, another `list`). Think of it like an array in C, except that it can store entities of different types. Examples - `[1, 2, 3]`, `[1, 'Python', [1, 2, 3]]`, etc.
* `tuple` - It is like `list` in the sense that it represents a collection of mixed entities, but the entities in it cannot be changed once set. Examples - `(1, 2, 3)`, `(1, (1, 2), 'Python')`, etc.
* `dict` - This is short for dictionary, which is a mapping of _keys_ to _values_. Examples - `{'Python': 'Sessions', 'Guido': 'BDFL'}`, etc.
* `set` - Another collection of mixed entities accepting only unique entities in which entities cannot be changed once set. Examples - `{1, 2, [1, 2]}`, etc.
* `bool` - Used to represent true or false. Can be either of two values: `True` or `False`.
* `bytes` - Used to represent entities which are binary numbers. Examples - `b'\x01\x02\x03'`, etc.
* `bytearray` - Used to represent an array containing binary numbers. Examples - `bytearray(b'\x01\x02\x03')`, etc.

I know. This seems daunting. But, don't worry. Some types share common properties with other types, making them behave in similar ways. So, once you learn a few, you can make safe predictions about the others, which brings us to: 

## Classification of data types

Before we dive into the details of each data type, we need to discuss the various ways in which data types are classified in Python. Knowing this classification will help you predict the behavior of entities of different data types. In general, all data types that fall under one category will show similar behavior. 

They can be classified as:
* **Immutable types or mutable types** - Mutability refers to an entity's ability to be changed or modified. Those entities which cannot be changed or modified are called immutable, while those which can be changed are called mutable.

    The following data types are immutable: `int`, `float`, `bool`, `complex`, `tuple`, `str`, `bytes` and `set`.

    The following data types are mutable: `list`, `bytearray` and `dict`.

    This means that if you try to change something inside a `str` or a `tuple`, you'll get an error, while this is allowed in `list` entities.

* **Sequence types and numeric types** - Numeric types are data types which are used to represent a form of numbers, like integers, floats and complex numbers. On the other hand, sequence types are those which hold a sequence of data, kind of like an array in C. 

    The following data types are numeric types: `int`, `float`, `complex` and `bool`.

    The following data types are sequence types: `list`, `tuple`, `str`, `bytes`, and `bytearray`.

    All numeric types support mathematical operations on them like addition, subtraction, multiplication, raising to a power, etc. On the other hand, sequence types support things like indexing, slicing, iteration (all are things you'll learn), etc.

* **Container sequences and flat sequences** - Sequence types are further classified into container or flat sequences. Container sequences are those which hold refrences to the entites they contain, while flat sequences store each item physically in their own memory space. 

    The following sequences are containers: `list` and `tuple`.

    The following sequences are flat: `str`, `bytes` and `bytearray`.

    Since container sequences only hold references of entities, the entities can be of any type, while in the case of flat sequences, the items need to be of the same type (For example, in a `str`, each item is a character).

Knowing this classification, you can very well say that `int` entites cannot be changed and only reassigned, and can be added, subtracted or multiplied. You can also say that `list` and `dict` entities can be modified, while `str` and `tuple` cannot be modified. See how you can predict the behavior?


Now that we have dicussed classification, we can finally look into each data type in details. This document will only be concerned with `int`, `float` and `str`.


## The `int` data type

This particular data type is used to represent integers like 1, 2, -2, -3, etc. Since there are no type declarations (`int a = 1;`) in Python, declaring a variable as `int` is very simple:

```python
>>> a = 1  # becomes int
>>> a
1
>>> b = 200
>>> b
200
>>> c = -3
>>> c
-3
```

Entities of the `int` data type support common operations between them like addition, subtraction, multiplication, etc. 

```python
>>> a = 1
>>> b = 2
>>> a + b
3
>>> a + 1
2
>>> a - b
-1
>>> a * b
2
>>> b ** 3  # ** is the exponent operator
8
>>> a += 3  # '+=', '-=', '*=' works here
>>> a
4
```

I am not going to add an explanation about memory. Why? Because you don't need to worry about it in the case of Python. Python uses something called Garbage Collection to decide how memory is distributed between different entities and the one of the reasons for its existence is for you to not worry about memory. 

But, much later in the sessions, we will discuss how being completely ignorant of memory usage can cause problems. That's something for much later, though.

Let's look at the `float` data type.

## The `float` data type

This data type is used to represent floating-point numbers, i.e. numbers having digits after a decimal point, like 1.1, 2.2, -3.0, etc. The reasons behind having a separate data type for pure integers and for floats in all programming languages is something to do with how numbers are handled by computer hardware. Declaring a variable as `float` is very simple:

```python
>>> a = 1.0  # add a decimal, becomes float
>>> a
1.0
>>> b = -1.22
>>> b
-1.22
>>> c = 3.14
>>> c
>>> 3.14
>>> d = .2 # can omit 0 and instead, write like this
>>> d
0.2
>>> a += 2.0  # '+=', '-=', '*=' works in Python as well
>>> a
3.0
```

Since `float` is a numeric data type, it supports arithmetic operations like addition, subtraction, multiplication, etc.

```python
>>> a + 1.0  # continuing from above
2.0
>>> a - 1.0
0.0
>>> a + b
-0.22
>>> b * (-1)
1.22
>>> b ** 2
1.4884
```


## The `str` data type

The `str` data type is used to represent strings or a sequence of characters like name of people, places, things, sentences, alphabets, etc. **In C**, to represent a sentence or a name, you'd use an array of the `char` type, where `char` is a fundamental type used to represent a single character like `A`, `a`, `?`, etc. In Python, there is no such distinction. The `str` type is used to represent a single character as well as a set of characters. This means that the entity, `a`, is a `str` and the entity, `abc`, is also a `str`. 

You can declare a variable as an `str` by enclosing the entity within single or double inverted commas. There's no rule as such which governs when to use single or double inverted commas. This is just provided by Python to help you represent strings which have inverted commas within themselves like `Python's data types` or `"String are fun!"`. 

```python
>>> a = 'Python'  # using single
>>> a
'Python'
>>> b = "This is a sentence"  # using double
>>> b
"This is a sentence"
>>> c = "What's your name?"  # using double since single part of string
>>> c
"What's your name?"
>>> d = 'He said, "My name is Python"'  # using single since double part of string
>>> d
'He said, "My name is Python"'
>>> e = 'My name's Malay'
File "<stdin>", line 1
    e = 'My name's Malay'
                 ^
SyntaxError: invalid syntax # trying to use single when single already in string, error
```

The paradigm with double- and single- inverted commas we used above is called _escaping_, where one character is used to change the behavior of another character. In the string, `What's your name?`, we are using double-inverted commas to escape the behavior of the single-inverted comma (which is to mark the beginning or end of a string), while in the string, `He said, "My name is Python"`, we are using single-inverted commas to escape the behavior of double-inverted commas (to mark the beginning or end of a string). In the last instance, as far as Python is concerned, the string declaration already ended at the occurence of the second single-inverted comma (the one after `e` in `name`), and everything after that is not part of the string. Hence, we get an error.

### Indexing

`str` entites, being sequences, support indexing using the `[]` operator. Indexing is the process of obtaining the value at a particular index of a sequence, where index refers to the position starting from 0. Example:

```python
>>> a = 'Python is fun!'
>>> a[0]  # 1st value, 0 index
'P'
>>> a[3]  # 4th value, 3 index 
'h'
>>> a[13]  # last value, 13 index
'!'
>>> b = a[7]
>>> b
'i'
```

While it is possible to obtain the last value in the `str` like above, Python provides you with the a shorter and more reliable way of obtaining the last value:

```python
>>> a[-1] 
'!'
```

While our first method to obtain the last value (`a[13]`) works okay for short strings, maybe even for a string with 20 characters, but doing this would be difficult for large (1,000s, 10,000s of characters) strings. You'd have to know the length and index the string on the basis of that. But, the second method (`a[-1]`) works irrespective of the length of the string and directly gives us the last value. Think of this as the first character (the `1` of `-1`) from the end (`-` in `-1`). This syntax can be extended to obtain any numbered value from the end:

```python
>>> a[-2]  # 2nd from end
'n'
>>> a[-6]  # 6th from end
's'
```

### Slicing

Again, since `str` entites are sequences, they support slicing using the `[]` operator.  Slicing is the process of obtaining a part of a sequence using a pre-defined syntax. The `[]` operator takes three values, `start`, `stop` and `step`, as `[start:stop:step]`. `start` defines the position where slicing should start, `stop` defines the position where slicing should stop excluding the index itself and `step` defines the number of items that should be "jumped" while slicing. Let's see a few examples:

```python
>>> a = 'The quick brown fox jumped over the lazy dog'
>>> a[1:4]
'he '
```

This gives us the part of the string which starts at 1 and ends and one less than 4. Notice how we didn't get the item at the 4th index (`q`) and only got items up to the third index. If we wanted to obtain every second character from the 1st index to one less than the 10th index, we'd use `step` like this:

```python
>>> a[1:10:2]
'h uc'
```

When we want our slice to be taken from the beginning of the string or want it to go till the end of the string, we can ommit the `start` or `step` values:

```python
>>> a[:13] # from beginning to one less than 13
'The quick bro'
>>> a[:14:5]  # every 5th character from the beginning to one less than 14
'Tub'
>>> a[2:]  # from 2nd index to the very end
'e quick brown foxed jumped over the lazy dog'
>>> a[2::2]  # every 2nd character from 2nd index to the very end
'eqikbonfxdjme vrtelz o'
```

If we don't mention `start`, `stop` and `step`, it simply means that we want the whole string:

```python
>>> a[:]
'The quick brown foxed jumped over the lazy dog'
```

When we mention `step`, we will get every `step`-th character from beginning to end:

```python
>>> a[::2]  # every 2nd character from beginning to end
'Teqikbonfxdjme vrtelz o'
>>> a[::5]  # every 5th character
'Tub dpvhzg'
```

Knowing this, we can very easily obtain the reverse of a string by just stating step as `-1`:

```python
>>> a[::-1] # the negative means start from the end
'god yzal eht revo depmuj dexof nworb kciuq ehT'
>>> a[::-2]  # every 2nd character starting from the end
'gdya h eodpu eo wr cu h'
```

There is not much I can explain _right now_ about how this works, but know that Python has this syntax facilities for you to use. Your slices can be assigned to other variables to store them and use them in the future:

```python
>>> b = a[::-1]
>>> b  # thus, you now have the reverse of the string in a variable
'god yzal eht revo depmuj dexof nworb kciuq ehT'
```

**Always remember that `start` comes at the beginning, `stop` comes in the middle, after the first `:` and `step` comes at the end, after the second `:`**. This is why you need to have the ':' even when you're omitting `start` or `step`.

### Concatenation and multiplcation

You can concatenate two or more `str` entities into one `str` entity using the `+` operator. Moreover, you can repeat a string entity any number of times using the `*` operator. Let's see a few examples:

```python
>>> a = 'Python'
>>> b = '101'
>>> a + b  # both strings jooined
'Python101'
>>> a + b + 'Sessions'  # can be used with as many strings as you want to
'Python101Sessions'
>>> a * 3  # 'Python' is repeated three times
'PythonPythonPython'
>>> a - b  # '-' does not work for strings
Traceback (most recent call last):
  File "<stdin>", line 1, in <module>
TypeError: unsupported operand type(s) for -: 'str' and 'str'
```

### Length calculation

Ah, you might be thinking that to obtain the length, you'll have to write a loop. Nope, you don't. Python has the built-in `len()` function **which can be applied on _any_ sequence type to obtain its length**. Simply pass the sequence entity as the parameter of the function and it will give you the length:

```python
>>> a = 'Python'
>>> len(a)
6
>>> a = 'This is a sentence'
>>> len(a)
18
```

There are many more built-in functions that Python defines. We will discuss them later in the sessions.

### Substring checking

It is very natural to want to check whether a particular string occurs in another string. For example, does `y` occur in `Python` or does `abc` occur in a string having a 1000 characters? Again, you'd have to write a loop, won't you? Nope, you won't. Python provides you with the `in` keyword **which can be applied on _any_ sequence type to check whether an entity occurs in the sequence or not**. It returns `True` or `False`. 

```python
>>> a = 'Python'
>>> 'P' in a
True
>>> 'Py' in a
True
>>> 'thon' in a
True
>>> 'z' in a
False
>>> a = 'dgagyagdabcuagdugwudgds'
>>> 'abc' in a
True
```


### Immutability 

This might be the most important characteristic of `str` entities, since Python does a lot of things with entities based on their mutability. By saying strings are immutable, it means that, once you have declared a string, you can't change the contents of the string. You cannot change the item at any index and trying to do this will give you an error:

```python
>>> a = 'Python'
>>> a[-1] = 'C'  # trying to change the last character
Traceback (most recent call last):
  File "<stdin>", line 1, in <module>
TypeError: 'str' object does not support item assignment
>>> a[2] = 'F'  # trying to change the 2nd character
Traceback (most recent call last):
  File "<stdin>", line 1, in <module>
TypeError: 'str' object does not support item assignment
```

Therefore, once you have a string entity, it will remain the same. You can only reassign a variable to a new string entity and not change an existing string entity. Now, you may ask, how does this work?

```python
>>> a = 'Python'
>>> a += '101'
>>> a
'Python101'
```

You're technically changing the existing string, aren't you? Nope, you are not. This is equivalent to `a = a + '101'`. So, what happens is that Python creates a new entity, `a + '101'`, and assigns `a` to _that_ entity.

It is important to fully grasp the immutability of data types in Python and you should experiment with this here and there to completely understand it. 

### String methods

Python, being the high-level language it is, provides you with a lot of built-in "methods" that you can apply on your `str` entites. These methods help you perform common operations on your `str` entities such as checking whether the string ends with a particular string or not, finding the index of some item, splitting your string based on some character, etc. These methods are accessed using the `.` (dot) operator, called the _method accessor_. Here are some common methods:

#### `find()`

The `find()` method returns the index of the item passed as a parameter to the function in the string. When the item does not exist in the string, it returns -1. This is different from `in` because in as `in` returns `True` or `False` based on whether a substring exists in the string or not, while `find()` returns the _index_ of the item itself or `-1`.

```python
>>> a = 'This is a sentence'
>>> a.find('T')
0
>>> a.find('z')  # -1 when item not in string
-1
>>> a.find(' ')
4
```

Notice how a space (`' '`) was present in more than one place but `find()` only returned the index of the first occurence. This is how `find()` is designed. When there are more than once instances of the parameter in the string, it returns the index of the first occurence. Apart from single characters, you can also obtain the index of substrings, where it will return the index at which the substring starts:

```python
>>> a.find('sentence')
10
```

There's a method similar to `find()` called `index()`. The latter is a more general method which can be applied on all sequence types to find the index of an entity. Moreover, while `find()` handles checks for items not in the string (by returning `-1`), `index()` raises a `ValueError` when the item is not present in the sequence. 

```python
>>> a.index('T')
0
>>> a.index('sentence')
10
>>> a.index('z')  # not -1 when the item is not in the string
Traceback (most recent call last):
  File "<stdin>", line 1, in <module>
ValueError: substring not found
```


#### `split()`

This method splits the string into different components based on some character, and returns a `list` containing those components. The character used for splitting is not included in the result. By default, `split()` splits the string on spaces (`' '`), but you can pass it any character and your string will be split at the character:

```python
>>> a = 'This is a sentence'
>>> a.split()  # splitting at space
['This', 'is', 'a', 'sentence']
>>> a = 'Two,three,four'
>>> a.split(',')  # splitting at commas
['Two', 'three', 'four']
>>> a.split('e')
['Two,thr', '', ',four']
```

#### `lower()` and `upper()`

`lower()` and `upper()` convert a string to lowercase and uppercase respectively. 

```python
>>> a = 'UPPERCASE'
>>> a.lower()
'uppercase'
>>> a = 'lowercase'
>>> a.upper()
'LOWERCASE'
```

We also have `title()`, which converts the first letter of every word in a string to uppercase, so that is in the title format.

```python
>>> a = 'this is a sentence'
>>> a.title()
'This Is A Sentence'
```

#### `is`-prefixed methods

There are a few methods which check the state of the string, which are prefixed by `is`. We have `isupper()`, which checks whether all the characters in the string are in uppercase or not, we have `islower()`, which does the opposite, we have `isalpha()`, which checks whether all characters in the string are alphabets or not, we have `isdigit()`, which checks whether all the characters in the string are digits or not, etc. Examples:

```python
>>> a = 'lowercase'
>>> a.islower()  # lowercase checking
True
>>> a.isupper()
False

>>> a = 'UPPERCASE'
>>> a.isupper()  # uppercase checking
True
>>> a.islower()
False

>>> a = 'abc'
>>> a.isalpha()
True
>>> a.isdigit()
False

>>> a = '123'
>>> a.isdigit()
True
>>> a.isalpha()
False
```

There are a few more `is`-prefixed methods available like `istitle()`, `isspace`, etc.


#### `startswith()` and `endswith()`

These two methods check whether a string starts with or ends with a particular character or not. They take a single-charactered string or a substring and check whether or not that string is at the beginning or end of the string. Examples: 

```python
>>> a = 'This is a sentence'
>>> a.startswith('T')  # True since 'T' at the beginning
True
>>> a.startswith('This')  # True since 'This' at the beginning
True
>>> a.startswith('z')  # False since 'z' not at the beginning
False

>>> a.endswith('e')  # True since 'e' at the end
True
>>> a.endswith('nce')  # True since `nce` is last three characters
True
>>> a.endswith('z')  # False since 'z' not at the end
False
```


There are a few more methods, all of which can be viewed at [here](https://docs.python.org/3/library/stdtypes.html#typesseq-common).