## More on strings

In the last session, we discussed the `str` data type and extensively discussed how you can deal with strings in your Python programs. 

But, the `str` data type is a vast topic in itself and requires a bit more discussion before we can move forward to other data types. Specifically, this document will be about the `%` formatting scheme, the `format()` method available on strings and the shortcut, _f-strings_ available to do what this method does. 

When you're working with real-life problems and developing applications that will be used by normal users, it is very natural to want to represent some information in a string, to print out a message which indicates the current state of some value, the current state of some process, etc. Moreover, this printing of messages is also helpful when you're debugging your code and finding errors. 

The messages act both as a way to inform the user and as a way to inform yourself. In such scenarios, you usually want to print the value of a variable or the result of some expression. This requires converting the value or the result to the string data type because only strings can be printed. **Look at this C code**:

```c
int main(void):
{
    int a = 1;
    printf("Value of a: %d", a);
    return 0;
}
```

Since you want to print the value of `a`, you're using it in the `printf` function. What do you think that `%d` is doing over there? Well, basically, it is taking your integer, `a`, and converting it to a `char`, so that it can be used by `printf`. This is called _string formatting_, where you display a string based on the values of some variables.

Python provides you a similar functionality, using the `%` format scheme, '`format()` method and _f-strings_. 

## The `%` format scheme

Just like writing a `%` sign followd by some character like `d`, `f`, `i`, etc., depending on the data type of the variable replaces that part by the value of the variable (as shown above), Python provides you with a similar syntax to format your strings. You can display variables in your strings using a similar scheme:

```python
>>> a = 1
>>> b = 2
>>> c = 'a: %d, b: %d' % (a, b)
>>> c
'a: 1, b: 2'
```

As can be seen, the `%d`'s were replaced by the value of the variables specified after the `%` sign outside the string. There's no specific reason for using `%d` here since Python's variables can easily change types. We could have used `%f` instead and the two variables would have been converted to floats:

```python
>>> d = 'a: %f, b: %f' % (a, b)
>>> d
'a: 1.000000, b: 2.000000'
```

**Notice the 6 zeroes after the decimal**. This is because the default precision for `%f` is set to `0.6`, meaning use at least 0 character spaces to display the number and show exactly 6 digits after the decimal point. You can change this:

```python
>>> d = 'a: %0.2f, b: %0.3f' % (a, b)
>>> d
'a: 1.00, b: 2.000'
```

What if we change the number before the decimal? 

```python
>>> d = 'a: %6.2f, b: %3.2f' % (a, b)
>>> d
'a:   1.00, b: 2.00'
```

Notice the extra space before `1.00`. This is because we have told Python to use at least 6 character spaces (in `6.2f`) to display the number. Since the total length of the number including the decimal and the zeroes is 4, we are getting **2** extra spaces before `1.00` (`6-4 = 2`; you'll count 3 but there is one due to the space after `a:` in the string).

Do note that there need to be as many values inside the `()` as there are `%`'s inside the string.

While this is convenient in general cases, it does not scale well for a larger number of variables, which brings us to...

## The `format()` method

In any string, you can specify the places you want your variables to be printed in using `{}`. These will be replaced by the relevant variables passed as arguments to the method. Here's an example:

```python
>>> a = 1
>>> b = 2
>>> c = 3
>>> d = 'a: {}, b: {}, c: {}'.format(a, b, c)
>>> d
'a: 1, b: 2, c: 3'
```

Corresponding to the arguments in the `format()` method, the `{}` were replaced by the values. The thing to note here is that your variables will be replaced according to their position in the argument list of the function. Since `a` comes before `b`, which comes before `c`, the order of replacement is `a`, `b` and `c`. What happens when you change the ordering? 

```python
>>> d = 'a: {}, b: {}, c: {}'.format(b, c, a)
'a: 2, b: 3, c: 1'
>>> d = 'a: {0.2f}, b: {}, c: {}'.format(c, b, a)
'a: 3, b: 2, c: 1'
```

As can be seen, the replacement was done according to the ordering of the arguments in the method. 

Having this method offers you a tonne of functionality as a variable of any data-type can be placed in the string using this: 

```python
>>> a =  1.0
>>> b = 1
>>> c = 'hello'
>>> d = 'float: {}, int: {}, str: {}'.format(a, b, c)
>>> d
'float: 1.0, int: 1, str: Hello'
```

While relying on the ordering of arguments works in most cases, you can make your code more readable by passing the arguments using some identifier:

```python
>>> a = 1
>>> b = 'Hello'
>>> c = 1.22
>>> d = 'int: {integer}, str: {string}, float: {float}'.format(integer=a, string=b, float=c)
>>> d
'int: 1, str: Hello, float: 1.22'
```

The brackets were replaced depending on the values specified for the identifiers in the arguments. Since `integer` was set to `a`, the bracket corresponding to `integer` was replaced by the value of `a` and so on. Using this, the ordering of the arguments becomes insignificant: 

```python
>>> a = 1
>>> b = 'Hello'
>>> c = 1.22
>>> d = 'int: {integer}, str: {string}, float: {float}'.format(float=c, integer=a, string=b)
>>> d
'int: 1, str: Hello, float: 1.22'
```

Take note of how the ordering of arguments is different but the result is the same. This is because each bracket now has an identifier associated with itself and will only be replaced by the value specified for that identifier. Since, even if the ordering is different, `integer` is still set to `a`, the bracket associated with it is replaced by the value of `a`.

Alternatively, you can also specify a number inside the brackets to replace values according to the ordering: 

```python
>>> d = 'int: {0}, str: {1}, float: {2}'.format(a, b, c)
>>> d
'int: 1, str: Hello, float: 1.22' 
```

Here, since the first set of brackets has been given the number `0`, it will be replaced by the first argument. Since the second set of brackets has been given the number `1`, it will be replaced by the second argument and so on.

You can use this to repeat the occurence of variables in your strings:

```python
>>> a = 1
>>> b = 2
>>> d = 'first: {0}, second: {1}, second: {1}, first: {0}, first: {0}'.format(a, b)
>>> d
'first: 1, second: 2, second: 2, first: 1, first: 1'
```

All brackets having the number `0` are replaced by the first argument while those having the number, `1`, are replaced by the second argument. 

The `format()` method is very flexible and going into every detail of the method is beyond the scope of the sessions. You'll see its flexibility as you use more and more of Python.

But, calling a method every time you want to do some simple string formatting can be problematic, and that brings us to...

## _f-strings_

These are a very new addition to the language and were added only in Python 3.6, which is the latest public version of Python 3. They allow you to replace variables in strings in-place, without calling any special methods. 

Any string prefixed with an _f_, followed by the usual way of writing a string, is an _f-string_. To replace a variable by its value in the string, you write the variables name between `{}`. Example:

```python
>>> a = 1
>>> b = 2
>>> c = f'a: {a}, b: {b}'
>>> c
'a: 1, b: 2'
```

The bracket specified by `a` was replaced with the value of `a` as defined before. Similarly, the value of `b` is replaced. 

More examples:

```python
>>> a = 1
>>> b = 2
>>> c = f'a: {a}, b: {b}, a: {a}, a: {a}, b: {b}'
>>> c
'a: 1, b: 2, a: 1, a: 1, b: 2'
```

You do not need to call any method on the string. As long as the variable exists in the program, its value will be replaced in the string. **Do note that, for this to work, you must prefix your string with an _f_**.

```python
>>> a = 'Malay'
>>> b = 'Python'
>>> c = f'{a} is helping you learn {b}'.  # this is a pretty useless example
>>> c
'Malay is helping you learn Python'
```

You can do this too:

```python
>>> a = 1 
>>> b = 2
>>> c = f'{(a * 5) + (b ** 3)}, {b - 5 + (a * 2)}'
>>> c
'13, -1'
```

There's still _more_ power that lies within _f-strings_. I can't demonstrate it yet since we haven't covered some of the basic expressions in Python. I'll show you the power later.


Alright! Do know that I have only given you an _introduction_ to string formatting in Python. There's an entire *format-mini language* defined by the language, which you can find [here](https://docs.python.org/3/library/string.html#format-string-syntax) (in case you're interested).

That's all for strings!

Malay Agarwal.