## The `list` Data Type

The `list` data type is used to store sequential data in Python programs. It is like C-arrays, but can store values of different data types.

(Note: You might be wondering why I am using so many C references. It's because it is a language all of you are comfortable in and can compare things to.)


In C, if you declare an integer array or a float array, it can store values of only integer or float data type:

```c
int main(void)
{
    int a[5];
    a[0] = 1;
    a[1] = 1.4;
    return 0;
}
```

This code will work. There won't be any errors. But, you might notice some odd behavior when you print this array. Your float value (`1.44`) will be truncated and converted into an integer, making you lose data since `1.44` won't remain as `1.44`.

**In a `list`, you can easily store different data types without losing any data**. 

Anything between an opening and a closing square bracket (`[]`) is a `list`. You declare them as:

```python
>>> a = [1, 2, 3]
>>> a
[1, 2, 3]
>>> b = [1, 'Malay', [1, 2], 1.0, -2]
>>> b
[1, 'Malay', [1, 2], 1.0, -2]
```

Note the second `list`. It has integers, floats, strings and another `list`. Therefore, a `list` can store another `list`. It can store tuples, dictionaries, sets, complex numbers, _any_ valid Python entity. 

Due to its flexibility, `list` is one of the major data structure used in Python programs. 

Let's discuss some of the common operations that can be applied on strings.

### Item reassignment - Mutability

`list` is a **mutable data structure**. This means that, even after declaring a `list`, you can change the values inside it, unlike in strings.

```python
>>> a = [1, 'Malay', 1.2, -2, [1, 2]]
>>> a[0] = 3  # changing 1st element to 3
>>> a
[3, 'Malay', 1.2, -2, [1, 2]]
>>> a[3] = 'Python'  # changing the 4th element
>>> a
[3, 'Malay', 1.2, 'Python', [1, 2]]
```

This can be further extended to change the values over an entire range of the list:

```python
>>> a = [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10]
>>> a[1:5] = [15, 16, 17, 18]
>>> a
[1, 15, 16, 17, 18, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10]
```

See what we did there? We changed the values at indices 1, 2, 3 and 4 of `a` to the values in the list on the right-hand side. Instead of a list, we can use any sequence type such as a string, tuple, etc. Since we've only covered strings, I'll show you an example with a string:

```python
>>> a[1:5] = 'Pyth'
>>> a
[1, 'P', 'y', 't', 'h', 6, 7, 8, 9, 10]
```

Notice how each index was replaced by one character of the string. 

You might think that the sequence on the right-hand side needs to have the same number of elements as the number of indices to be replaced. Think again. **Python `list` entities can dynamically change size**. Therefore, the `list` will rescale according to the number of elements in the right-hand side sequence:

```python
>>> a[1:5] = 'Python'
>>> a
[1, 'P', 'y', 't', 'h', 'o', 'n', 6, 7, 8, 9, 10]
```

Notice how we didn't get an error or `6` and `7` were _not_ overwritten by `o` and `n`. Instead, the list was resized to fit the extra elements.

What happens when the right-hand sequence has _less_ number of elements? Let's see:

```python
>>> a[1:5] = 'Py'
>>> a
[1, 'P', 'y', 6, 7, 8, 9, 10]
```

The values at indices 1 and 2 were replaced while we lost the ones at 3 and 4. This is because of the disparity in the size of our slice and the entity on the right-hand side. As a result, our list was shortened. Therefore, even if lists are resized, make sure you're using appropriately sized sequences for reassignment. 

### Indexing

Just like strings, `list` entities support indexing since they are sequences as well. You can obtain the value at a particular index using the `[]` (indexing) operator. 

```python
>>> a = [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10]
>>> b = a[0]
>>> b
1
>>> b = a[-1]  # give the last element, as in str
>>> b
10
```

Now, you know that lists can store lists. So, how do we obtain any value of a list which is inside a list? By using the `[]` operator twice:

```python
>>> a = [[1, 2, 3], 'Python', 1, [7, 8, 9]]
>>> c = a[0][0]  # getting 1st element of 1st list
>>> c
1
```

Here, we're first obtaining the first element of the list, `a`, which will give us the first list in `a`. Then, we are obtaining the first element of _that_ list. We can do the same with the string:

```python
>>> c = a[1][2] # getting 3rd element of 'Python'
>>> c
't'
```

The first `[]` operation gives us the string, and as we know, strings can be indexed, which is being done by the second `[]` operation. Naturally, we can slice the string: 

```python
>>> c = a[1][2:]
>>> c
'thon'
```

As a general rule, if there are n-number of nested lists as:

```
a = [ [ [ [ [...] ], ], ]
```

You'll have to do n number of `[]` operations to get to the innermost list and another `[]` operation to obtain an element from that list, as:

```
a[][][][][]...[]
```

### Slicing

Since `list` entities are sequences, you can slice them. The syntax is the same as that for strings:

```python
>>> a = [1, 2, 'Python', -1.22, [1, 2, 3]]
>>> b = a[1:4]
>>> b
[2, 'Python', -1.22]

>>> b = a[:3]  # from beginning to index, 5
>>> b
[1, 2, 'Python']

>>> b = a[3:]  # from 3 till end
>>> b
[-1.22, [1, 2, 3]]

>>> b = a[::-1]  # reversing the list
>>> b
[[1, 2, 3], -1.22, 'Python', 2, 1]

>>> b = a[1::2]  # from index, 1, getting every second element
>>> b
[2, -1.22]
```

Since we have covered slicing for strings, I am not going to go over it in more details again.

### Length calculation

Since list is a sequence, you can call the `len()` function to calculate its length:

```python
>>> a = [1, 2, 3, 4]
>>> len(a)
4
```

### Concatenation and Repetition 

Just like on strings, you can use the `+` operator to concatenate two or more lists. 

```python
>>> a = [1, 2, 3, 4]
>>> b = [5, 6, 7, 8]
>>> c = a + b
[1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8]
>>> a += b  # equivalent to a = a + b
>>> a
[1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8]
```

Again, like strings, you can repeat a smaller list using the `*` operator to create a bigger list:

```python
>>> a = [1, 2, 3] * 3
>>> a
[1, 2, 3, 1, 2, 3, 1, 2, 3]

>>> a = [1] * 6
>>> a
[1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1]

>>> a = ['A'] * 6
>>> a
['A', 'A', 'A', 'A', 'A', 'A']

>>> a = [['A']] * 6
>>> a
[['A'], ['A'], ['A'], ['A'], ['A'], ['A']]
```

Let's try working with the last list. Let's change the value in the first list to `B`.

```python
>>> a = [['A']] * 6
>>> a
[['A'], ['A'], ['A'], ['A'], ['A'], ['A']]
>>> a[0][0] = 'B'
>>> a
[['B'], ['B'], ['B'], ['B'], ['B'], ['B']]
```

Woah! What happened here? The value in all the nested lists changed! This is something to do with how entities are handled internally by Python. We won't go into details just yet. Just know that you shouldn't be using this to create nested lists _at any cost_. There will definitely be unexpected behavior.

### Item checking

Just like in strings, the `in` keyword can be used to check the existence of a particular value in the list.

```python
>>> a = [1, 2, 3, 'Python', 1.22]
>>> 1 in a
True
>>> 1.22 in a
True
>>> 'z' in a
False
```

### List methods

There are methods available to do some basic operations on lists. Here are some of the common ones. 

#### `append()`

This method adds an item to the end of the list, _in-place_. What does it mean to make a change in-place? Well, when we worked with strings, you must have noticed how `lower()` or `upper()` changed the case of our string but our original string remained intact. `append()`, on the other hand, makes the change in the list itself and our old state of the list is lost:

```python
>>> a = [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6]
>>> a.append(7)
>>> a
[1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7]
>>> a.append(8)
>>> a
[1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8]
```

When we try to assign the result of `append()` to a variable and look at it:

```python
>>> b = a.append(9)
>>> b
None
```

We get something called `None`. This is Python's way of representing _nothing_, analogous to `null` in most languages. You'll encounter `None` at a lot places. This basically means that `append()` returns nothing and makes changes in-place. 

#### `extend()`

When you call `append()` on a list and pass it another list, the entire list will be added to the end of the list. No, not each element of the list but the list _itself_.

```python
>>> a = [1, 2, 3, 4]
>>> a.extend([5, 6, 7])
>>> a
[1, 2, 3, 4, [5, 6, 7]]
```

This happens because lists _can_ store lists and this should, indeed, be the expected behavior of `append()` since it adds an element to the end of the list.

But, there are situations when you want to add each element of a list or any other sequence to the list, and not the list or sequence _itself_. In other words, there will be situations when you'd want to _extend_ the list. For that, lists have the aptly named method called `extend()`.

```python
>>> a = [1, 2, 3, 4, 5]
>>> a.extend([6, 7, 8, 9, 10])
>>> a
[1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10]
```

Notice the different behavior from `append()`. Instead of adding the list itself, the method added each element of the list to our main list. The method makes changes in-place, as well.

We can use any sequence instead of lists:

```python
>>> a = [1, 2, 3]
>>> a.extend('Python')
>>> a
[1, 2, 3, 'P', 'y', 't', 'h', 'o', 'n']
```


#### `insert()`

The `insert()` method, as the name suggests, inserts an element at some index. It takes two arguments: the index and the value, exactly in this order. 

```python
>>> a = [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6]
>>> a.insert(3, 'Python')  # inserting Python at 3 
>>> a
[1, 2, 3, 'Python', 4, 5, 6]
```

Take note of how, relative to the initial state of the list, everything after the 3rd index was shifted to accomodate `Python`, such that the index of `Python` in the modified list is 3.

```python
>>> a = [1, 2, 3, 4]
>>> a.insert(0, 0)  # inserting at first position
>>> a
[0, 1, 2, 3, 4]
```


#### `index()`

The `index()` method is used to obtain the index of a particular value in the list. In case the value does not exist, you'll get an error, just like strings:

```python
>>> a = [1, 2, 3, 4]
>>> a.index(4)
3
>>> a.index(1)
0
>>> a.index(3)
2
>>> a.index('z')
Traceback (most recent call last):
  File "<stdin>", line 1, in <module>
ValueError: 'z' is not in list
```


#### `remove()` 

The `remove()` method is used to remove an item from the list. If no such item exists in the list, you get an error:

```python
>>> a = [1, 2, 3, 4, 5]
>>> a.remove(5)
[1, 2, 3, 4]

>>> a.remove('z')
Traceback (most recent call last):
  File "<stdin>", line 1, in <module>
ValueError: list.remove(x): x not in list
```


#### `pop()`

The `pop()` method, by default, deletes the last element from the list and _returns_ it. It makes the changes in place but also returns the item that was deleted. This is partly because `pop()`, rather than taking an _item_ as its argument, takes an _index_ as the argument. Therefore, if you use `pop()` with an argument, it will delete the item _at_ that index:

```python
>>> a = [1, 2, 3, 4, 5]
>>> b = a.pop()
>>> a
[1, 2, 3, 4]
>>> b  # has the last element of the list
5

>>> b = a.pop(0)
>>> a  # note how value at index 0 is deleted
[2, 3, 4]
>>> b  # has the item at index 0

>>> b = a.pop(6)
Traceback (most recent call last):
  File "<stdin>", line 1, in <module>
IndexError: pop index out of range
```

As can be seen in the last instance, if you pass `pop()` an index that it greater than or equal to the length of the list, you'll get an error.

There are a few more methods, all of which are listed [here](https://docs.python.org/3.6/tutorial/datastructures.html#more-on-lists).

Alright! That covers lists!

Malay Agarwal.