## The `tuple` data type

Tuples are used to hold data that does not change over the course of a program. This is because tuples are **immutable**, meaning that their contents cannot be changed by the programmer once they are declared in the program. 

When it comes to immutability, there behavior is similar to that of `str`, where you get an error when you try to change the value at an index in an `str`.

Anything between `()` and separated by commas is a tuple. To declare a tuple: 

```python
>>> a = (1, 2, 3)
>>> b = (4, 5, 6)
```


Tuples are container-sequence type like lists, meaning that they store references to the values inside them rather than storing the values themselves, and therefore, can store values of any data type. 

```python
>>> a = (1, 'Malay', -1.22, (3, 4))
```

As you can see, a tuple can store another tuple, just like a list can store another list. 

While tuples can store data like lists, their behavior is similar to `str` due to their immutabililty. Naturally, they support all the operations that can be applied on an `str` and some of those which can be applied on a `list`.

Trying to change an existing value in a tuple will give you an error:

```python
>>> a = (1, 2, 'Malay', -1.22, (1, 2))
>>> a[0] = 4
Traceback (most recent call last):
  File "<stdin>", line 1, in <module>
TypeError: 'tuple' object does not support item assignment
```

Let's take a look at the operations supported by tuples. 

### Indexing

You can obtain the value at a particular index by using the `[]` operator, similar to `str` and `list`:

```python
>>> a = (1, 2, 'Python')
>>> a[0]
1

>>> a[-1]  # obtaining the last value
'Python'

>>> a[1]
2

>>> a = (1, 2, (1, 2))
>>> a[-1][1]  # obtaining 1-indexed value inside second tuple
2
```

### Slicing

Since tuples are sequences, they support slicing. 

```python
>>> a = (1, 2, 3, 4, 5, ('Malay', -3.14), 'Python')
>>> a[1:3]
(2, 3)

>>> a[1:5]
(2, 3, 4, 5)

>>> a[:6]
(1, 2, 3, 4, 5, ('Malay', -3.14))

>>> a[4:]
(5, ('Malay', -3.14), 'Python')

>>> a[::-1]  # reversing the tuple
('Python', ('Malay', -3.14), 5, 4, 3, 2, 1)
```

### Length calculation

You can call the `len` function on the tuple to obtain its length:

```python
>>> a = (1, 2, 3, ('Python', 'Amity'))
>>> len(a)
4
```

### Concatenation and multiplication

You can concatenate two or more tuples, or repeat a tuple using the `+` and `*` operators, respectively: 

```python
>>> a = (1, 2, 3, 4)
>>> a + (5, 6)
(1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6)

>>> a = (1, 2) * 3
>>> a
(1, 2, 1, 2, 1, 2)
```

A tuple isn't subject to the same behavior you noticed when creating nested lists using `*`. This is because tuples simply do not support such an operation:

```python
>>> a = (('A',),) * 3
>>> a
(('A',), ('A',), ('A',))

>>> a[0][0] = 'B'
Traceback (most recent call last):
  File "<stdin>", line 1, in <module>
TypeError: 'tuple' object does not support item assignment
```

You'll notice that I put a `,` after `A` over there and another one before the final bracket. This is to differentiate between normal, enclosing brackets (as used in expressions such as `1 + (2 + 3)`) and brackets specifying a tuple. Adding a comma tells Python that the entity is a tuple and not brackets used to enclose an expression. What happens when the comma is removed?

```python
>>> a = (('A'),) * 3  # removing comma after `A`
>>> a
('A', 'A', 'A')

>>> a = (('A',)) * 3  # removing comma befor final bracket
>>> a
('A', 'A', 'A')

>>> a = (('A')) * 3  # removing all commas
>>> a
'AAA'
```

The first two are equivalent to `('A',) * 3` while the last one is equivalent to `'A' * 3`. This is because, in the first one, the inner brackets are treated as enclosing brackets rather than brackets used to declare tuple. In the second one, the outer brackets are treated as enclosing brackets. In the third one, all brackets are treated as enclosing brackets and the expression just reduces down to an `str` being multiplied three times.

Of course, creating nested tuple using this is _very_ uncommon since you rarely have unchangeable data that is repeated this way and also, not recommended. It's still a good thing to know about, though.

### Item checking

You can use the `in` keyword to check the existence of a value in the tuple:

```python
>>> a = (1, 2, (3, 4), 'Python')
>>> 1 in a
True

>>> 'Python' in a
True

>>> (3, 4) in a
True

>>> 'z' in a
False
```


### Tuple unpacking and packing

Now this is a new concept which isn't really exclusive to tuples but was first implemented on tuples and then, extended to other sequence types. Tuple unpacking is an assignment operation which allows you to pick up values inside the tuple in individual variables. By using a special syntax format, you can obtain each value inside a tuple into variables. 

Let's look at an example. I'll first declare a tuple having three integers:

```python
>>> a = (1, 2, 3)
```

You can get the three values inside the tuple into three separate variables using this syntax:

```python
>>> x, y, z = a
```

Now, if you look at `x`, `y` and `z`, you'll see that they have been assigned the values `1`, `2` and `3`.

```python
>>> x
1
>>> y
2
>>> z
3
```

This looks like _unpacking_: Contents of a suitcase are being placed somewhere else, depeding on how you need them. 

If you have less number of variables and more values inside the tuple, you'll get an error:

```python
>>> x, y, z = (1, 2, 3, 4)
Traceback (most recent call last):
  File "<stdin>", line 1, in <module>
ValueError: too many values to unpack (expected 3)
```

This works in the reverse way as well, where you can create a tuple by writing variables in one line, separating each of them uing commas:

```python
>>> x = 1
>>> y = 2
>>> z = 3
>>> a = x, y, z
>>> a
(1, 2, 3)
```

This can be looked at as _packing_: multiple items are being put into a suitcase. 

There isn't any magic that's happening here, just the syntactic features made avaiable to you by Python. What happens is that Python sees these variables seprarated by commas and _implictly_ creates a tuple containing them, assigning that tuple to `a`. 

You can confirm that a tuple is being created by only executing the right-hand side expression in an interactive session:

```python
>>> x, y, z
(1, 2, 3)
```

Tuple unpacking can be further extended to declare variables:

```python
>>> a, b = 1, 2
>>> a
1
>>> b
2

>>> x, y = a, b
>>> x
1
>>> y 
2

>>> p, q = x + 1, y + 2
>>> p
2
>>> q
4
```

There are two things happening here: The right-hand side expressions are being _packed_ into a tuple _implictly_, and that tuple is being _unpacked_ and the values are being assigned to the variables. As you can see, you can increment variables and assign them to other variables using this syntax. 

Notice one thing:

```python
>>> x = 2
>>> a, b = x + 1, x + 2

>>> a
3
>>> b
4
```

What does this imply? That `x` **isn't** changed by one expression and then, that changed value is used by the next expression. The same value is used in _both_ the expressions. 

This is the recommended way of declaring variables in Python and you should practice extensively, making it a habit. 

Now, this can be extended to other sequences, but _only_ the unpacking part (assigning variables to values inside the sequence and not creating a sequence using variables). If you try to create a sequence using the `a, b, c, ...,` syntax, it will always create a tuple (unless you cast it to something else):

```python
>>> x, y, z = [1, 2, 3]
>>> x
1
>>> y
2
>>> z
3

>>> x, y, z = 'Pyt'
>>> x
'P'
>>> y 
'y'
>>> z
't'

>>> a = 1, 2, 3
>>> a  # always a tuple
(1, 2, 3)
```

### Tuple methods

Like lists and `str`, tuples support some methods which can be applied on them using `.`. Specifically, there are only two, both of which are common to all sequence types:

#### `index()`

This returns the index of a particular value and gives an error when the value is not present in the tuple:

```python
>>> a = (1, 2, 3)
>>> a.index(2)
1
>>> a.index('z')
Traceback (most recent call last):
  File "<stdin>", line 1, in <module>
ValueError: tuple.index(x): x not in tuple
```

#### `count()`

This method returns the count of a value in the tuple. It is also generic to all sequence types (and a method that I forgot to mention in the beginning). In case no such value exists in the tuple, it returns `0`.

```python
>>> a = (1, 1, 2, 2, 2, 3, 3, 3, 3)
>>> a.count(1)
2
>>> a.count(2)
3
>>> a.count(3)
4
>>> a.count('z')
0
```

Alright! That's all about operations on tuples.

Now, you may ask me why will I use tuples? I have lists to do all this and as a bonus, I can modify a list.

Well, one the very reasons for using tuples is _because_ they are immutable. They are the ideal data type to store a collection of data which will not change over the course of the program. Moreover, a tuple can be used to represent entities in some kind of structured data. Say you have a table of students with their names, grades, ages, address, etc. Each index of the tuple can be used to store one attribute, and you can collect multiple records in a tuple of tuples.

While you can use lists to do the same, there are two problems:
* Some unexpected event can change the values
* The data type is relatively slower.

Due to the immutability of tuples, the data type is faster and more efficient. As a result, it is the recommended data type in such situations. 

Later, we will meet a better variant of tuples called _namedtuple_, but this is all you need to know for now. 

Alright! That's all about tuples!

Malay Agarwal.




