## Python is a general-purpose programming language

Using Python, you can build a variety of things ranging from small, one-off scripts to large scale softwares. It can be used to develop the backend of websites using the Django and Flask frameworks. Python can be used in the data science, machine learning and artificial intelligence and has a wide variety of libraries available specifically for this such as pandas, NumPy, SciPy, matplotlib, etc. Basically, you can build almost anything in Python as long as you find a means of translating your idea into a program. Thus, Python is a general-purpose programming language. On the other hand, R is a language meant specifically for statistical analysis.

## Python is an interpreted language

To understand the difference between an *interpreted and compiled language*, let's look at the usual process of developing a software:
* Source code is written
* It is 'compiled'.
* It is executed.

The magic happens during compilation. In compilation, your source code is taken and translated into a form that can be understood by your CPU, meaning your hardware. This translated code (which is usually called machine code) is loaded into the memory of your CPU and sent in a way similar to the structure of your source code to the control unit (CU) of the CPU. The CU executes this code, solely because it understands it, and calls the arithmetic logic unit (ALU) whenever necessary to do mathematical computations. The results are sent back to the memory. 
In the end, it is the ouput that is presented to us in a human-readable format.

Given this, when we are talking about a compiled language, it means that the lanuguage's code (your source code) is translated _before_ it is executed. The code is already loaded into your memory as machine code and is ready to be sent to the control unit. In languages such as C or C++, an executable `exe` file is created after the compilation which uses the machine code to run. Understand the fact that machine code can be understood by your computer without any further translation. Therefore, the `exe` file can run on _any_ similarly architectured (same OS, same bit, etc.) computer without having to install C or C++. 

In these, if you make any changes to the code, you need to recompile it and the existing `exe` is overwritten with the new machine code. Moreover, any syntactic errors (missing semi-colon, unclosed bracket, etc.) are identified before execution and you are not allowed to execute the program before fixing this.

Do all this, what is used is called a *compliler*.


On the other hand, when we are talking about interpreted languages, it means that your source code is being translated to machine code (or some other low-level representation) _on the fly_. The code is translated as and when it is encountered in your source code and executed then and there. A line of code is read, it is translated, loaded into memory and executed. Then, the next line of code is read, translated, loaded, executed and so on. Essentially, the demarcation between compilation and execution is removed, and both of them become one single process. To do this, something called an *interpreter* is used. Therefore, you cannot run a particular Python program without having Python installed on your computer. When you are installing Python from the internet, what you're installing, inter alia, is the Python interpreter. 

Since the code is translated and executed line by line, the program works fine till no error is encountered. Once an error is encountered, the interpreter stops and exits out of the program, showing an error message. Thus, you can easily run a faulty Python program, till the point of fault. 

In a sense, *compilation* is involved in both the langauges. It is just a difference of the time of compilation.

To have a more intuitive understanding, let's look at an example:

```
> Give Raju an apple
> Take banana from Raju
> Call Ramesh
> Eat fruits
```

A compiler would look at this in this way:

```
> Raju needs to be given an apple. I will need an apple. Do I have an apple? Yes, can be done. No, cannot be done - error.
> A banana needs to be taken from Raju. Raju needs to have a banana. Do he have a banana? Yes, can be done. No, cannot be done - error.
> Ramesh needs to be called. Ramesh needs to exist. Does Ramesh exist? Yes, can be done. No, cannot be done - error. 
> I need to eat fruits. Do I have fruits? Yes, can be done. No, cannot be done - error.
```

_*If*_ there were no errors (meaning none of the cases were 'no'), this is executed. Otherwise, you need to fix the errors before it can be executed.

Now, let's assume that Ramesh does not exist. An interpreter would look at this in this way:

```
> Raju needs to be given an apple. I will need an apple. Do I have an apple? Yes. Give apple to Raju.
> A banana needs to be taken from Raju. Raju needs to have a banana. Does he have a banana? Yes. Take banana from Raju.
> Ramesh needs to be called. Ramesh needs to exist. Does he exist? No. Give error - cannot call ramesh. Stop. Exit.
```

In the output, you'll get the result of the first two instructions while the third will produce an error. Since the third instruction produced an error, the interpreter will simply ignore the fourth instruction and exit out of the program.

Therefore, Python is an interpreted language, where each line of code is translated and executed as and when it is encoutered.

## Python is a dynamically-typed language

When I say 'typed', I don't mean writing text using your keyboard. This 'typed' refers to the way type checking is done for variables and expressions in the language. Type checking refers to the process used to determine the data type of some variable or the return data type of some expression. There are two types of paradigms followed: *Statically typed and dynamically typed*. What happens in statically typed languages is that the programmer needs to explicitly state the data type of a variable using keywords such as `int`, `float`, `double`, etc. On the other hand, in dynamically typed languages, the data type of a variable or expression is determined by the value of the variable, and there is no need to explicitly state the data type of the same.

An example of a statically typed language is C. In C, you need to specify the data type of your variable.

```c
int main(void)
{
    int a = 1; //needs to be told that it is int
    float b = c;
    a = "Malay";  //changing the data type not allowed; will give error
    return 0;
}
```

On the other hand, in Python, you do not need to explicitly mention the data type of a variable and it will be selected automatically on the basis of the variable's value.

```python
>>> a = 1  # int data type
>>> a
1
>>> b = 1.0  # float data type
>>> b
1.0
>>> a = 'Malay'  # int to str data type allowed
>>> a
'Malay'
```

Another way of looking at this is by considering when data types are assigned to variables. In statically-typed languages, the assignment is done during compilation, meaning that a particular variable is bound to its data type at the time of compilation and will remain of that same data type throughout the execution of the program. This is why we will get an error when we try to run the above C code. 

In dynamically-typed languages, the assignment is done during execution, meaning that a variable is bound to its data type depending on the value when it is encountered in the code and remains of the same data type until it is reassigned at a later part of the code. This is why our Python code works; `a` will change from an `int` to a `str`. 

This can cause problems since the data type of a variable can change unexpectedly during the course of the program. But, it also makes the syntax simpler and the language much easier to learn.

## Python is a strongly-typed language

Again, 'typed' does not refer to writing text using your keyboward, and is about data types. There are two things: *strongly-typed and weakly typed*. In strongly-typed languages, coercion of one data type to another in certain cases does not happen. Coercion refers to the conversion of one data type to another data type. When you try to do operations on two meaningfully different data types (say, a string and an integer), an error is raised. On the other hand, in weakly-typed languages, this coercion in certain cases exists. An str may be converted into an integer or vice-versa in an expression, and there is no error in such cases.

Python is an example of the former. In Python, for example, you cannot add an integer and a string using the `+` operator.

```python
>>> '1' + 1  # not possible
TypeError: must be str, not int
```

On the other hand, JavaScript is an example of a weakly-typed langauge. In it, for example, we can add a string and an integer, and the result will be a string. 

```javascript
> '3' + 1 //string returned
'31'  
> '3' + '3' - '3' //int returned; '3' + '3' = '33'; 33 - 3 = 30
30
```


## Python is object oriented

Everything in Python is an object, meaning that it is an instance of some class. You have the ability to represent complex objects using simple data types and operate on these objects using functions, encapsulating all these in a single unit called a class. Thus, Python is object-oriented (we'll cover this later in our sessions).

## Python is a high-level language

Depending on how much the details of the implementation of a particular language are hidden, programming languages are classified into two types: High-level and low-level. In low-level languages, a lot of the details are visible to you as the programmer and you have greater control over youur program and consequently, have greater control over the system. You can do things like manually allocate memory to variables or manually free memory taken up by variables. Since you can control the memory and lot of the hardware, you can make your system do a lot of things in low-level languages. Examples include C, C++, etc. 

On the other hand, in high-level languages, a lot of the details are hidden from you and you do most of your work by calling in-built and predefined functions. In most of them, memory allocation is handled automatically by the language and you do not need to worry about it. Python is an example of a high-level language. 


All these attributes make Python the fun and highly readable language it is!


Malay Agarwal.