Python was the brainchild of Guido van Rossum, a dutch programmer, while he was working at CWI in the Netherlands. It was conceived in the 1980's and its development started in 1989. It's name is taken from a famous British comedy show, 'Monty Python's Flying Circus,' of which Guido was a big fan. Guido has been given the title, 'Benevolent Dictator for Life' (BDFL) as he continues to oversee the development of Python and makes decisions when necessary.

It was first published as version `0.9.0` in February 1991, and reached version `1.0` in January 1994. This version included many new features in the language. The next major release was version `2.0`. This marked the opening up of the development of Python to the larger community, and people other than Guido started contributing to the development process of the langauge. The last edition in the `2` series is `2.7`. 

The next big update was version `3.0`, which brought many changes to how things were handled by Python internally. A lot of legacy code was removed, and more efficient and less redundant ways of doinig things were introduced. A lot of fundamental design flaws were fixed, which could not be done while maintaining backwards compatibility with Python 2. As a result, generally, Python 3 code does not work in Python 2. Currently, Python 3 stands at version `3.6`.

Out there, in the world, both Python 2 and Python 3 co-exist. This is because a lot of people were already using Python 2 by the time Python 3 came out, and the need to change large amounts of Python 2 code to make it run in Python 3 led to people being slow to adopt Python 3. Still, Python 2's support is scheduled to end in 2020, after which it will stop recieving bug fixes. Almost all of the major libraries in Python have migrated to Python 3, and there is no reason to start programming in Python with version 2.'


For a more detailed history, go [here](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/History_of_Python).

Malay Agarwal.