## What's Available

### A Thing About The Python Implementation

As was mentioned in the document supporting the last session, when you're installing Python, you're installing the Python interpreter, among other things. This interpreter translates the code into some lower-language and executes it. Due to this, there can be differences in the language your Python code is translated into and how it is executed, which has resulted in various types of interpreters being available for the language. By default, the interpreter used is CPython. To go into the internals of this is beyond the scope of our sessions, but, on a high level, think that internally, all Python is doing is calling some C code.

Similarly, we have Jython, which translates Python code into Java bytecode (not something you need to worry about now) and runs it in the Java Virtual Machine (another thing you don't need to worry about), we have PyPy, which relies on JIT compilation (nope, don't worry about it), we have IronPython, etc.

Think of this in this way: There are many different ways of making _rosogullas_, its just a matter of preference and need.

So, now, which should you use? I'd say CPython, in most cases. This is because CPython is the standard implementation of the language and almost all Python code that you'll find out there is written in this implementation. Moreover, all other implementations are just derivatives of this implementation. But, in certain cases, using some other implementation might make sense. 

For example, if you want to write Python code that runs in a Java Virtual Machine, Jython is the way to go. If you want to write Python code that runs faster than traditional Python code, PyPy is the way to go (it is faster due to JIT compilation). 

**For our sessions, we're going to use CPython and only CPython. I recommend CPython for general Python development as well**.

### A Thing About Python Distributions

Python has a tonne of built-in and third party packages (you'll understand what packages are by the time we are done with our sessions). When you install Python from the official [website](https://www.python.org/), you only get the built-in packages. There are a few problems with this:

* You'll have to download the common third-party packages yourself. 
* Downloading each one of them manually can be difficult.
* Managing dependencies will be difficult.
* Updating to new versions will be difficult.
* There will be no central hub to keep track of all your packages.

So, how can you eliminate these problems? The answer is very simple: by using Python distributions. These distributions accumulate all the necessary things for Python development into one installation, thereby eliminating the need to install everything one-by-one. You get Python, its built-in packages and most of the commonly used third-party packages. In addition to this, you also get necesssary software such as IDE's, text editors, etc. 

Install once and get everything you need. Moving forward, you can install the additional packages and software that you need as and when required without having to worry about the common packages and software. 


Examples include **Anaconda from Continuum Analytics**, **ActivePython from ActiveState**,  **PocketPyton**, etc.

Think of it this way: There are many shops selling _rosogullas_ in different kinds of packets. There is this one shop which set the standard for packaging, but there are other packages in different colors and sizes.

The commonly used distribution is Anaconda (due to the sudden increase in Python use for data science). It includes common Python third-party packages used both, in general development and specifically for data science.

Instead of downloading Python from the website, I highly recommend using Anaconda. Once you're more experienced with the language, you can decide whether to continue with Anaconda or do a manual set-up for Python.

**We'll be using Anaconda in the sessions**.

## A Thing About Text Editors and IDE's

There are mainly two ways of writing code on your computer: using text editors or using **I**ntegrated **D**evelopment **E**nvironments, abbreviated as IDE's. Don't worry. The latter isn't some complex entity that will take time to understand. Both of these are software, different mainly in the features they offer. 

A text-editor is more of a no-shit-just-code thing where you can write your code and in some cases, run it to see the output. Examples are Sublime Text, Vim, Notepad++, VS Code and even Notepad (yes, you can write code in Notepad; remember those HTML classes in school?). Some editors support things like syntax highlighting, code suggestion and auto-completion. 

IDE's, on the other hand, as the name suggests, are a complete development environment. Apart from supporting writing code, running it and having all the features of text-editors, they allow you to debug (finding bugs and removing them) your code, have integrations for external services used extensively in development, have consoles built into them, etc. Examples include PyCharm, Visual Studio, CodeBlocks (not for Python), etc.

Due to the additional features in IDE's, they are bulky and use a lot of resources and hence, take time to launch. 

It's just a matter of preference, really. Want something fast which allows you to write your code as soon as possible? Go for a text-editor. Want something which does more than allowing you to write code? Go for an IDE.

**Since we want to write code as fast as possible without waiting long for a program to launch, we will be using Sublime**.

(Note: Sublime is not a free software. It has an unlimited trial version which will just ping you from time to time to buy a full license.) 

**In case you want to use an IDE, use PyCharm**. It's specifically made for Python and works best with the language.

## A Thing About Jupyter Notebooks

Jupyter Notebook is a web-based interface for creating IPython notebooks. Essentially, IPython is nothing but a command line that let's you _write_ Python code in an interactive session, with syntax highlighting, code suggestions and auto-complete. The files that you create using IPython are called notebooks (just a naming convention) and have the extension, `ipynb`. Jupyter Notebook implements this same thing but on a web-based interface and extends the functionality of IPython by adding more features.

It comes in handy because of the following reasons:
* You have individual _cells_ to write your code in, allowing you to organize your code in a nice, cohesive nature, where each _cell_ can be designated to a particular code block. 
* The cells can be executed individually, independent of each other. Thus, you can execute a cell which appears much later in your code before all the other cells.
* The output is shown right where you are, without having you to move away from your current window.
* It shows the interpreted nature of Python in action.
* You can add text to your notebook along with code, thereby allowing you to create proper "notebooks" which have code and its supporting explanation all in one place.

**Since we are using Anaconda, we do not need to install Jupyter Notebook separately. It comes bundled in the distribution.**

## Summing It All Up

So, here are the things you need for Python development:
* A preferred Python interpreter. We're using CPython.
* A Python installation. To do this, we're using the Anaconda distribution, which includes the CPython implementation of Python.
* A text-editor or an IDE. We're using the text-editor, Sublime Text.


Head over to the next section to see how you can get your set-up up and running.

## Setting-up Python on Windows Systems

### Downloading Anaconda

1. Head over to this website: [Anaconda](https://www.anaconda.com).
2. In the right-hand side corner, you'll see a big, green download button. Click on it.
3. On the page that opens, scroll down and you'll see two options: `Python 3.6 version` and `Python 2.7 version`. Click the download button for the first option and wait. It's a big download (~ 557 MB), so it will take time. 
4. Once the download is done, launch the installer and follow the instructions. In the page which asks you about the install directory, change it to `C:\Anaconda3`.
5. Wait for the installation to complete. 

Great! Now, you have Python installed, along with a tonne of third-party packages.


### Downloading Sublime

1. Head over to this website: [Sublime Text](https://www.sublimetext.com/). You'll see a greyish `Download for Windows` button right when you open the website. Click on it. 
2. Wait for the download to complete.
3. Launch the installer and follow the instructions. 
4. Wait for it to complete.

That's it! You have Sublime installed.


### Adding Python to the Path

If you wish to launch Python in your command prompt, you first need to add it to the path. To do this:

1. Right click on `This PC`.
2. In the menu that pops up, click on `Properties`.
3. On the left-hand side of the window that will show up, you'll find `Advanced system settings`. Click on that. 
4. In the window that shows up, you'll find `Environment Variables`. Click on that. 
5. On the window that shows up, highlight `Path` and click on `Edit`.
6. Now, click on `Browse` and select `C:\Anaconda3`. Click on `OK`. 
7. Also, click on `Browse` again and select `C:\Anaconda3\Scripts`. Click on `OK`. This will add some more things to the path so that we can use them from the command line.

That's it! Python has been added to the path and can be run from your command line.

### Opening Jupyter Notebooks

While you can open Jupyter Notebook from command prompt, a better option is `Anaconda Prompt`, which was installed on your system when you installed Anaconda. Anaconda Prompt has all the commands you'll need already added to the path and you can just launch it without having to worry about some command not working. To open Jupyter Notebook:

1. Open Anaconda Prompt.
2. `cd` to the directory where you wish to open Jupyter Notebook. Say, you're in the `C:` drive and want to open it in `C:\ProgramFiles`. To `cd` to this directory:

```console
C:\>cd ProgramFiles 
```

3. After this, type the command, `jupyter notebook`:

```console
C:\ProgramFiles>jupyter notebook 
```

4. You'll have to wait a little while before Jupyter Notebook launches in your default web browser.


Álright! That's all for the set-up!


## Additional resources:

* Anaconda [website](https://www.anaconda.com).
* Sublime [website](https://www.sublimetext.com/).
* [YouTube video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=xFciV6Ew5r4) on setting up Sublime for Python. There are set-up videos for other editors and IDE's on the channel.
* IPython's [Wikipedia page](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/IPython#Notebook).
* Jupyter Notebook [website](http://jupyter.org/).
