## Table of Contents

- [If Statements in Python](#if-statements-in-python)
    * [Overview](#overview)
    * [The Syntax](#the-syntax)

## If Statements in Python

### Overview

`if`-statements are a fundamental component of any programming languages. Their main utility lies in the fact that they allow you to take different actions based on the nature of some condition. If the condition is true, they allow you to do a specific thing and if the condition is false, they allow you to do another thing.


This is a very powerful mechanism. Say you have a number (maybe taken from a user or read from a file) and you want to tell a user of your program whether that number is positive or negative, even or odd, greater than some other number or not, present in a list or not, etc. In all such situations, you can use an if statement to make a decision.

For those of you who have some experience in C, this particular syntax for an `if` will be familiar:

```c
int main(void)
{
    int x;
    printf("Enter a number: ");
    scanf("%d", &x);

    if (x >= 0)
        printf("The number is positive.\n");
    else
        printf("The number is negative.\n");

    return 0;
}
```

This particular block is simple. If the value of `x` is greater than or equal to `0`, whatever is inside the `if`-block will be executed. Otherwise, whatever is inside the `else`-block will be executed.

`if`-statements in Python have a slightly different syntax, but you will still be able to draw similarities between them. To do that, let's generalize the syntax to some kind of pseudocode:

```code
if condition
{
    // body
}
else
{
    // body
}
```

Basically, you need to write the keyword `if`, followed by the condition that the `if` will operate on. Then the body of the `if` statement will follow, within some kind of demarcation which indicates that this part is the body of the `if`. In C, this demarcation is done through the two braces, `{` and `}`. Whatever is in between `{` and `}` after an `if`-statement is part of the body of the `if`.


### The Syntax

Now, let's look at the Python `if`-statement:

```python
if condition:
    # body
else:
    # body
```

From the above generalization, at first glance, we see that it has at least two of the components: the `if` keyword and the condition.

But, what about the demarcation? This is where Python differs from most other programming languages. Instead of using braces (`{` and `}`) for specifying which code block belongs to which part of the code like in C or Java, Python uses _indentation_. Indentation refers to the space that occurs before a line of code. For example, in the above `if` statement, the comment `# body` is preceded by 4 spaces, meaning it has an indentation level of one. 

Why one? Because a number of spaces are considered to be the first level of indentation. In Python, it is generally 4 spaces. If you were to add 8 spaces, that would mean there are two levels of indentation as `8 /4 = 2`. For 12 spaces, the indentation level would be three and so on.

In languages like C, the indentation is unimportant, so much so that you can remove it completely:

```c
int main(void)
{
int x;
printf("Enter a number: ");
scanf("%d", &x);

if (x >= 0)
    printf("The number is positive.\n");
else
    printf("The number is negative.\n");

return 0;
}
```

This is because the braces tell C which code block belongs to which part of code. Since everything between `int x` and `return 0` is enclosed in `{` and `}` after `main()`, it is a part of `main()`. The indentation is immaterial.

But, in Python, indentation is critical. If a particular line of code is indented by at least one level after a previous line of code, that means the former is a part of the latter. What do I mean by this?

```python
if condition:
    print("Hi! I am Python.")
else:
    print("I love indentation!")
```

Here, the first `print()` call has 4 spaces before it, therefore being indented by one level, and the entire line is preceded by the `if` statement and the `:` (colon). Therefore, this first `print()` call is a part of the `if`block.

Similarly, the second `print()` call is indented by one level after the `else` statement and the `:`. As a result, it is part of the `else` block.

The next natural question is why the `:`? Well, you need to tell Python where to start looking for the body of the `if`. Think about it. It does not have braces and relies solely on indentation. Therefore, there _needs_ to be something which tells Python that, `Hey! I am done writing the if statement. Now whatever follows this :, all that stuff is supposed to be the body of the if, as long as it is indented by one level after the if`.

The colon is basically used for this.

> Don't worry if all this is not making much sense now. It will become clearer once you see more block statements such as loops and functions.

Therefore, Python does follow the generalized syntax of an `if`-statement:

* It has the keyword `if`
* It has the condition after the `if`
* For demarcation of the body, it uses the `:` and indentation

One other difference between Python `if`-statements and those in other languages is the need to enclose the condition within `(` and `)`. Let's see a comparison:

```c
if (x >= 0)
    printf("x is positive.\n");
else
    printf("x is negative.\n");
```

Notice how the condition has been placed in brackets. The equivalent Python code:

```python
if x >= 0:
    print("x is positive.\n")
else:
    print("x is negative.\n")
```

Notice how the condition is not placed in brackets. Basically, you can conclude that Guido van Rossum despises brackets.


### Examples

Now that we have the syntax out of the way, let's look at a few examples:


* **Checking whether a number is positive or not**: 

```python
x = input("Enter a number: ")
if x >= 0:
    print("x is positive")
else:
    print(" x is negative")
```

* **Checking whether a number is even or not**:

```python
x = input("Enter a number: ")
if x % 2 == 0:
    print("The number is even.")
else:
    print("The number i odd.")
```

* **Making sure a number is not zero before division**.

```python
x = input("Enter a number: ")
y = 100
if x != 0:
    y = y / x
    print("y was divided by x. The result is ", y)
else:
    print("You are trying to divide by zero which is not allowed.")
```

Notice how the second line inside the `if` is indented at the same level as the first line. This tells Python that this line is a part of the `if`-statement. Also notice that for writing the `else`, we are going back to the _zero_ level of indentation. This indicates the end of the `if`-block and the beginning of the `else`-block.

* **Incrementing a number based on some condition:**

```python
x = 200
if x >= 100:
    x += 100
print(x)
```

Again, notice how `print()` is at the same level of indentation as the `if`. This means it is not part of the `if`.

 











